Blog post for Prompts with Resource temlates (#1089)
modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol: blog/content/posts/2025-07-29-prompts-for-automation.md

+++

> date = '2025-08-01T11:46:28+01:00'
> draft = false

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date = '2025-08-04T18:00:00+01:00'
publishDate = '2025-08-04T18:00:00+01:00'
draft = false
```

Reviewer: https://gohugo.io/methods/page/publishdate/

MCP prompts offer more than command shortcuts. They're a primitive for building workflow automation that combines the flexibility of scripting with the intelligence of modern AI systems. This post explores how to build automations using MCP's prompt system, resource templates, and modular servers. I'll demonstrate these concepts through a meal planning automation I built, but the patterns apply broadly to any structured, repetitive workflow.

## Example: Automating Weekly Meal Planning

I needed to solve a recurring problem: planning weekly meals by cuisine to manage ingredients efficiently. The manual process involved selecting a cuisine, choosing dishes, listing ingredients, shopping, and organizing recipes—repetitive steps that took significant time each week.

> So I decided to use MCP! By automating these steps, I could reduce the entire workflow to selecting a cuisine and receiving a complete meal plan with shopping list:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So I decided to use MCP! By automating these steps, I could reduce the entire workflow to selecting a cuisine and receiving a complete meal plan with shopping list. (Any client that supports MCP prompts should work!)
```

> 1. Select a prompt

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **Select a prompt**
```

   <img
     src="/posts/images/prompts-list.png"
     alt="MCP prompts list showing available automation commands"
   />

> 2. Select a cuisine from a dropdown (Suggestions)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. **Select a cuisine from a dropdown**
```

   <img
     src="/posts/images/prompts-suggestions.png"
     alt="Dropdown showing cuisine suggestions as user types"
   />

> 3. Done! The system generates a meal plan, shopping list, and even prints the shopping list and recipes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. **Done!**

The system generates a meal plan, shopping list, and even prints the shopping list and recipes.
```

<img
    src="/posts/images/prompts-final-result.png"
    alt="Final generated meal plan and shopping list output"
  />

> Here we are focuses primarily on the Recipe Server with its prompts and resources. You can find the [printing server example here](https://github.com/ihrpr/mcp-server-tiny-print) (it works with a specific thermal printer model, but you could easily swap it for email, Notion, or any other output method). The beauty of separate servers is that you can mix and match different capabilities.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here we are focused primarily on the Recipe Server with its prompts and resources. You can find the [printing server example here](https://github.com/ihrpr/mcp-server-tiny-print) (it works with a specific thermal printer model, but you could easily swap it for email, Notion, or any other output method). The beauty of separate MCP servers is that you can mix and match different capabilities.
```

## Core Components

Let's dive into the three components that make this automation possible: [prompts](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-06-18/server/prompts), [resources](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-06-18/server/resources), and [completions](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-06-18/server/utilities/completion). I'll show you how each works conceptually, then we'll implement them together.

### 1. Resource Templates

> In MCP, [static resources](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-06-18/server/resources#resource-types) represent specific pieces of content with unique URIs—like `file://recipes/italian.md` or `file://recipes/mexican.md`. While straightforward, this approach doesn't scale well. If you have recipes for 20 cuisines, you'd need to define 20 separate resources, each with its own URI and metadata.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In MCP, [static resources](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-06-18/server/resources#resource-types) represent specific pieces of content with unique URIs—like `file://recipes/italian.md` or `file://recipes/mexican.md`. 

While straightforward, this approach doesn't scale well. If you have recipes for 20 cuisines, you'd need to define 20 separate resources, each with its own URI and metadata.
```

[Resource templates](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-06-18/server/resources#resource-templates) solve this through URI patterns with parameters, transforming static resource definitions into dynamic content providers.

> A template like `file://recipes/{cuisine}` transforms a single resource definition into a dynamic content provider:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, a template like `file://recipes/{cuisine}.md` might represent a set of resources like these:
```

> - `file://recipes/italian` returns Italian recipes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `file://recipes/italian.md` returns Italian recipes
```

> - `file://recipes/mexican` returns Mexican recipes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `file://recipes/mexican.md` returns Mexican recipes
```

## Building the Recipe Server

Let's implement a complete MCP server that brings together all the concepts we've discussed. We'll start with the server setup and then implement each capability.

### Prerequisites

Before diving into the code, make sure you have:

1. **Node.js** (v18 or higher) and npm installed
2. **MCP SDK** installed:
   ```bash
   npm install @modelcontextprotocol/sdk
   ```
3. **A MCP-compatible client** like VS Code with the MCP extension

For this tutorial, I'll use the TypeScript SDK, but MCP also supports Python and other languages.

### Server Setup and Capabilities

First, let's create our MCP server:

```typescript
const server = new McpServer({
  name: "favorite-recipes",
  version: "1.0.0",
});

async function main() {
  const transport = new StdioServerTransport();
  await server.connect(transport);
}

main().catch((error) => {
  console.error("Server error:", error);
  process.exit(1);
});
```

Each capability declaration tells MCP clients what features your server supports:

- `resources`: Your server can provide dynamic content (recipe collections)
- `prompts`: Your server offers automation commands

> - `completion`: Your server provides parameter suggestions

Author: yes, in higl level server SDK (mcp) we infer capabiltities. When using low-level those need to be defined.

> - `completion`: Your server provides parameter suggestions

Reviewer 3: Should we mention that, or should we just explicitly add the capabilities anyway?  Otherwise, the "Each capability declaration tells..." part is a bit confusing.

> - `completion`: Your server provides parameter suggestions

Author: let me re-write it. the initial version of the blog post had lowlevel implementation, but that looked like overkill
